---
title: Convergence, or All The Things I've Been Thinking About That Turned Out To Be The Same Thing
layout: post
---

So, I came pretty close to buying an iPhone because I found a deal for a
refurbished 8GB 3G for $99. I ultimately decided not to after realizing
that the cost of the device is really pretty trivial compared to the
contractual commitment. I'm sure I'll cave soon or later, but I'm going
to try to wait until I have a real job and for there to be some more
Android phones (I saw my first G1 in the wild a few days ago) on the
market (which I think there will be a bunch more early in 2009, though
I'll probably be reluctant to buy a first generation Android phone from
any manufacturer).

But it got me thinking a lot about smart phones, and how they're slowly
turning into universal remotes, except not just for televisions and dvd
players, but for everything. Kind of like what Ben Kingsley had in
[Sneakers](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0105435/).

It also got me thinking about how a giant (like 10" screen) iPhone would
be a great netbook/tablet, especially with
[Swype](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/?q=node/1260), which makes me think
that netbooks are just big smart phones. A bunch of OEMs are supposed to
release new touchscreen convertible (swivel-screen) netbooks at CES in
January. I imagine the hardware will all be pretty similar, and really
usability, i.e. the user interface, will decide the quality of the
products. And I think both android and the iPhone OS (which is OSX, I
think?) are pretty much ideal for these.

I'm pretty annoyed at how much service still costs, though. Both cell
phone voice/data/sms and just broadband in general. And it seems like
the problem in both cases stems from the fact that the initial
infrastructure costs prohibit a lot of competition, not to mention
building more infrastructure would be redundant. But it sucks that just
a few corporations own all the infrastructure (and can subsequently
charge 20 cents per text message, which is madness).

I separately started thinking about the recent proposal by Kevin Martin,
chairman of the FCC (who is apparently [still talking about
it](http://news.slashdot.org/article.pl?sid=08/12/30/2335200&from=rss),
and even willing to drop the censorship provision (though I never really
cared, since his original proposal was opt-out)), to create a free
nationwide broadband wi-fi network. I have erotic fantasies about this
proposal.

I think the implications of this are bigger than just everyone being
able to check their email from anywhere. Because all of the old
media/communications are becoming digital and subsequently (though
slowly) migrating to the internet anyway.
[Television](http://www.hulu.com/),
[movies](http://www.netflix.com/HowItWorks),
[music/radio](http://www.last.fm/), newspapers, even telecom is moving
slowly VoIP-ward.

A ubiquitous wireless network of sufficient power makes all of the old
media obsolete.

We wouldn't even have to waste bandwidth on any of that other stuff. The
entire RF spectrum could all just be the global ubiquitous wireless
internet, and any communication between any two points could be through
the One Medium (though maybe this is bad for security?).

I think that would mean that hardware would lose the arbitrary
restrictions that the different systems put on them. The discrete points
of ‘cell phone,' ‘smart phone,' ‘netbook,' ‘laptop' and ‘desktop' on the
spectrum of computing devices would flatten out and instead there would
exist devices at every point on the spectrum, tailored to suit
consumers' preferences exactly.

The One Medium also makes cloud computing even more feasible, which
allows the hardware to be nothing more than an internet connection with
a UI.

Something that's really appealing about this, too, is that I think it
works more like a public utility or freeway system (remember the
‘information superhighway?'), and no private corporation owns all of the
infos (except maybe the cloud computing providers (i.e. Google)? hm… uh
oh).

I'm sure if that even if any of this is at all technically feasible,
it's still a long, long way off, but that's the direction I see it
going. Any thoughts?
