---
title: "More Convergence: How Twitter (as an open protocol, ideally) could (and maybe will) replace IM and all web commenting and make them both better"
layout: post
alias: /post/111175655/more-convergence-how-twitter-as-an-open-protocol
---

I've been messing with different Twitter clients. My favorite desktop
client is still [TwitterGadget](http://www.twittergadget.com/), because
it's so lightweight and is fairly keyboard friendly (though it certainly
has room to improve on this front). It's actually a Gmail gadget, but I
use it as a [Prism](http://labs.mozilla.com/projects/prism/)
application. [Tweetdeck](http://www.tweetdeck.com/beta/) and
[Twhirl](http://www.twhirl.org/) seem to be the most popular desktop
clients, but they're not that responsive for me maybe because they're
Adobe Air applications. I'm sure they're great for heavy Twitter users,
but for the functionality that Twitter provides for me at this point,
all I really want is something simple and lightweight.

[SimplyTweet](http://motionobj.com/simplytweet/) is still my favorite
iPod Touch client, and I wish there was a desktop version, frankly. The
feature list is really great, and includes:
[Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com/) support(!); a "View
Conversation" button for each tweet, which is a bit buggy but is a
really cool idea; grouping, in the form of "Saved Views" that filters by
contact and "Saved Searches" which filters by keyword.

Really, I think those are about all the features you need in a desktop
client to replace IM and make Twitter more robust and give it a more
immediate, IRC-like conversational feel. With \#hashtags and direct
messages, Twitter already has most of the functionality. The Adobe Air
applications that I mentioned earlier are almost there with their
columns, but I imagine the experience more like my hands-down favorite
IM client, Digsby. Each window/tab would represent either a contact (a
two-way conversation); a user-defined group (e.g. "Real Friends" or
"Apps" (which are actually two of my saved views in SimplyTweet)); a
keyword search (firehose of what people are saying about a given
subject); or a \#hashtag (make-shift chatroom on a given subject, or,
really, not (on a given subject)). The client could use the direct
messaging functionality to make two-way or group conversations private.

For a two-way chat, the tab/window would simply be a filter for that
contact's @replies, and would transparently append the appropriate
@reply to each message sent from the tab/window. Groups and searches
would just be normal filtered views. \#Hashtag chatrooms, then, would
just be a filtered view of the \#hashtag that would append the \#hashtag
onto outgoing messages. I think how private chats would work is with
some sort of obfuscated \#hashtag and the client would transparently
send direct messages to all the parties involved.

Since I imagine \#hashtags would have to become arbitrarily long,
Twitter would probably have to get rid of the artificial 140 character
limit, which I think is pretty stupid and arbitrary (does anyone really
use the text message interface to Twitter?) anyway.

I think something like this would make Twitter much more engaging.
Twitter isn't as amenable to long conversations as it is to unprompted
unidirectional musings, which are fine, but aren't suitable to everyone
(i.e. me). It also opens up all of the conversation that happens in
private right now over IM to the public. Not that all conversation
should be public, but there's no real reason for a lot of it to be
private, and if it's in the public, it can potentially engage and
connect many people who might otherwise be unaware of each other.

Also, [Twitter
comments](http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/integrate_twitter_comments_int.php)
becoming a standard would be cool (I'm looking into implementing it
here[^1]). This would expose stuff about what you're reading and
commenting on to your Twitter stream, creating a conversation space on
Twitter about a post, and also provides an element of persistent online
identity that I've [written about
before](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/100514718/persistent-online-identity).
I can even imagine some sort of trackback system implementation that
aggregates commenting on a subject across websites to make one giant
conversation about a *subject* as opposed to a particular blog post or
whatever.

Twitter's simplicity allows it to be extremely flexible, which is why
it's already being used in so many different ways, and what gives it so
much potential. And also [why it should become an open
protocol](http://regulargeek.com/2009/02/25/twitter-is-not-broken-it-is-infrastructure/),
like email.

Aside: I'm wondering if anyone uses the "Favorites" functionality of
twitter. Apparently you can mark individual tweets. I'm not sure how
that's useful.

### Notes

[^1]: Update: I just realized Disqus has integrated with Twitter, which is
    close, but not all there. 
