---
title: Twitter
layout: post
alias: /post/105575514/twitter
---

I've been on twitter for a few months now, but I have to admit, I wasn't
really getting it until I read
[this](http://bhc3.wordpress.com/2009/03/17/how-to-tweet-your-way-out-of-a-job/).
I mean, there are clearly many ways to use twitter, including the reason
that twitter gives you: to broadcast your current status.

But I, like many, don't really feel the need to tell people when I'm
pooping, and also don't feel the need to know when others are pooping. I
think this is why many people dismiss twitter, like I did until
recently.

But, in the exchange linked to above, something really familiar happens:
someone overhears a public conversation. And that's what I now realize
is the most useful analogy for twitter: public conversation.

IM is cool, but it's limited by nature; it's a connection between two
points. Twitter allows similar exchanges, but in public, so anyone can
join, and anyone can search for what people are saying on any given
subject.

I think it actually accomplishes a lot of the same stuff as the party
chat we've been using: it's low-involvement, people can pay as much
attention to it as they feel like, and not everyone has to be engaged in
the conversation to follow it.

I feel like a lot of people would be more interested, or at least less
resistant to it if they marketed it this way and provided an IM
interface. Apparently there used to be an IM interface, but they took it
down in October because it was buggy, and they've put it on their
long-term to do list, with no update since.

There's a bot that uses jabber called [excla.im](http://excla.im/), but
I couldn't get it to work, and it apparently only allows you to send
tweets, not get them.

So, that's too bad. Digsby's twitter functionality is pretty good, but
the interface is not great. I don't see why they don't offer their
functionality in the form of a contact, with the exact same user
interaction as any other contact. That would make me happy.
