---
title: Quick App Idea
layout: post
alias: /post/2421369026/quick-app-idea
---

Here's an idea for a distributed, peer-to-peer (though not massively
distributed, probably no more than three nodes in any network) backup
system that's sort of a mix between Dropbox and a backup service like
Carbonite or Backblaze.

Off-site backup is probably a really good idea. But. I'm not sure if
it's a good enough idea that I want to pay a monthly fee for it. And I
would imagine that most people have a significant amount of excess
storage in their homes. So this app would incorporate that excess
storage with the background syncing of one of the services mentioned
above.

Here's how it would look in practice: you and a friend install the
software and set aside a certain amount of space for the other user. You
set certain folders to backup, and the software waits until it's late at
night or cpu/bandwidth is not being used, and syncs the folders to an
encrypted thing on the other node.

It would be fairly fire-and-forget, though it would have to notify you
if you're getting close to the storage limit you've been allocated by
your friend (stingy jerk).

You could also just set this up between your home and work computers,
say. I can imagine, too, for even more simplicity, a completely
closed-box system, a piece of hardware that's basically a big hdd with
an ethernet port and this app on it that you could stick on a friend's
home network or your work network.

I'd pay (once) for this.
