---
title: "You are the product."
layout: post
alias: /post/9910020865/you-are-the-product
---

In a talk last Friday at the
[dConstruct](http://2011.dconstruct.org/conference/don-norman)
conference, design luminary Don Norman repeated an increasingly popular
refrain about Google: "[In] fact, the advertisers are the users and you
are the product." It's the kind of glib soundbite that [certain
bloggers](http://daringfireball.net/linked/2011/09/05/norman-google)
can't resist, but collapses on close scrutiny.

The argument goes something like this: You are only truly a company's
customer if you pay them directly for products or services. Google users
don't pay Google directly, therefore Google users are not Google
customers, but products that Google sells to advertisers. The logic that
underlies this argument is that a user must be a customer *or* a
product, never both, and the implication is that it's bad to be a
â€˜product.'

The sentiment wouldn't be compelling if it didn't have some kernel of
truth. It's certainly true that any advertising-based business model has
a different relationship with its users than a more traditional one that
sells products directly to customers. But the dichotomy between customer
and product is a false one, and it's precisely the incentive structure
of the ad-based model that shows it to be false.

### Accountability

Ultimately, the argument is one about accountability. Apple, to take an
obvious example, is accountable to its customers because customers pay
them. Their incentive is to make the highest quality product so that
customers keep paying for them. Google, the argument goes, is not
accountable to its users, because the users don't pay Google. It takes
only a moment's consideration to realize that this line of reasoning is
facile at best, and actively dishonest at worst. Because of course
Google is still accountable to its users, just not through direct
monetary transactions. Google is accountable to its users because
advertisers won't pay if they don't have users. Google is also
accountable to advertisers, but that doesn't negate its accountability
to its users. It still needs happy users to make money.

### Alternatives

It's really an argument against advertising in general, and ignores the
fact that advertising has historically enabled the production of all
kinds of media, from network television shows to newspapers, to
magazines to *ahem* tech blogs,[^1] that would otherwise have
been impossible. It ignores the fact that Google, specifically, has
given the world access to a mindbogglingly useful utility (its search
engine) for free, supported by ads that are often actually useful. And
that's not to mention all the other amazing products that Google offers
for free.

### Incentives

There are certainly trade-offs. Because Google can target ads better
with more information, it has an incentive to gather as much data about
its users as possible. But this incentive has always existed for media
companies like newspapers and magazines. Information about the
subscribership was always more valuable than the subscriptions
themselves, because publishers as a matter of course sold their
subscribers' information to advertisers. At least Google just uses the
data internally to target ads. This data-gathering incentive will always
leave Google at a point on a spectrum of privacy that some people will
consider invasive and others won't mind.[^2]

But it's not like a direct transaction business doesn't have some bad
incentives. Apple, as a vendor, wants to extract as much money as
possible from its customers. Most of the time this incentive translates
to creating high-quality products. But sometimes it translates to
hindering competition through artifical extra-market means like patent
litigation. Apple also has the incentive to produce its products as
cheaply as possible. Most of the time this incentive translates to
making its operations as efficient as possible. But sometimes it
translates to sacrificing worker conditions. These are both
controversial issues, but my point is that there are good and bad
incentives in any business model, and there are plenty of examples of
abuse in both.

### Currency

I think it's easy for rich people to say things like "you are the
product." But I don't think most people, even having considered all the
implications, consider themselves products. I certainly don't. We just
think of ourselves as paying for the products with alternative currency,
and we're glad that we can avail ourselves of these products in exchange
for resources that we have in great supply: our attention and our
information.

### Meaningless

The incentives are real. Some are good and some are bad. They can be
useful to point out as explanatory forces for real practices, but
without evidence of real malfeasance, sentiments like "you are the
product" are just empty rhetoric.

via
[GigaOm](http://gigaom.com/2011/09/05/don-norman-google-doesnt-get-people-it-sells-them/)

### Notes

[^1]: The most dishonest part about someone like John Gruber making this
    argument is that Daring Fireball is, of course, wholly ad-supported.
    

[^2]: To a large degree, I find Google's gathering of my information -- my
    personal data, my browsing habits, my interests -- to be mostly
    inoffensive. Keeping that information secret doesn't do me much
    good, but Google can aggregate my data with that of others and make
    it hugely useful. That's pure wealth creation as far as I'm
    concerned. 
