---
title: Holding the Web in Your Hands
layout: post
---

I'm typing this on a Cr-48, Google's pilot hardware for Chrome OS. On
Wednesday at the second keynote address of Google I/O, their developer
conference, Google
[announced](http://thisismynext.com/2011/05/11/google-chromebooks-coming/)
that final retail hardware will be available this Summer from Samsung
and Acer. The day before, at the first keynote, they
[announced](http://thisismynext.com/2011/05/10/google-io-android-ice-cream-sandwich/)
Android Ice Cream Sandwich (no version number yet), which will unify the
OS across phones, tablets, and Google TV.

While at first glance it may seem like Android and Chrome OS target the
same space, the respective tones of the two keynotes and the pricing
models of the coming Chromebooks indicate the following
[break-down](http://twitter.com/#!/reckless/status/68373650872610816):
Android for consumers; Chrome OS for enterprise.

That axis is interesting in certain respects, but it's not [the
one](http://twitter.com/#!/chockenberry/status/68374633065361408) I find
most interesting: Android for touch interface; Chrome OS for separate
hardware inputs.[^1]

Since the original iPad's introduction, I've been ambivalent about the
form factor. On one hand, its direct manipulation interface paradigm
(and especially Apple's groundbreaking execution of it) is intuitive,
powerful, and genuinely fun. On the other, it's restrictive: the
interaction bandwidth is simply less than the venerable mouse + keyboard
combination; and the metaphor itself, while making certain
interactions--like swiping and pinch-to-zoom--natural, narrows the
available input options, relegating anything more than the first-order
gestures to hidden, basically undiscoverable gestures that bear no
relation to the metaphor.[^2]

Text input is another problem. The on-screen keyboard--even with
automatic--real-time error correction, is no substitute for a real
hardware keyboard.[^3] It's transient and stultifying, which
can't but inform the text that passes through it to some, however
vanishing, degree. The form factor itself, furthermore, ergonomically
discourages text input.[^4]

### Technology as Philosophy

My biggest gripe about the iPad is that it's a reversion to pre-internet
media values. If implementations of technology are founded on
philosophical assumptions, the old broadcast media systems like
television and radio are founded on authoritarian, heirarchical ones. A
(more or less) centralized, consolidated authority produced the content
that the rest of us used to sit back and consume. In this respect, the
personal computing and internet revolutions--and blogging,
specifically--were intrinsically democratizing ones. The iPad is a
betrayal/reversal of this trend, a device that's optimized for passive
consumption, the interface optimized for interaction with the device,
instead of interaction with other people.[^5]

The Chromebook, conversely, is an open embrace of the
web.[^6][^7] It's an instantiation of the promise of the
removal of every barrier between us and a place where we can congregate,
communicate, and collaborate freely, as well as an investment in a
future where all of our computing is accessible from anywhere, from any
device.

I submit, too, that the laptop form factor is a more democratic one. In
lieu of a claustrophobic software keyboard, it dedicates half of the
visible hardware to input, metaphorically elevating the user's
production to the same level of importance as her consumption. It says
something about what the purpose of the device is: to participate in the
global conversation, in the exchange of ideas.

[This
ad](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TVqe8ieqz10&feature=player_embedded)
introducing the Chromebook asserts that it's not a laptop, or even a
computer. Instead, "it actually IS the web." It's a beautiful dream.

### Notes

[^1]: [Tentative
    plans](http://dev.chromium.org/chromium-os/user-experience/form-factors/tablet)
    for a Chrome OS tablet have not come to fruition, at least not yet.
    

[^2]: Even Apple [has had to
    resort](http://www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2011/01/apple-ios-multitouch/)
    to things like three- and four-finger swiping gestures that map to
    commands that have no intuitive mapping to the the gestures. I've
    written more about the limitations of a the direct manipulation
    paradigm
    [here](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/3556631202/touch-ui-is-not-the-future-of-everything)
    . 

[^3]: The tactile feedback of a physical keyboard is difficult to
    replicate. I'd hoped that Swype or other software keyboard
    technologies would succeed at routing around this problem, but in my
    experience you still have to pay attention to both the keyboard and
    the text you're producing which is a lot of mental overhead that the
    tactile feedback of keyboards obviates. [Blind
    type](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M9b8NlMd79w&feature=player_embedded)
    seems like it's close to a solution, but I haven't gotten to try it
    yet. 

[^4]: This is a big enough problem that Bev puts down the iPad and grabs
    her iPhone to write emails. 

[^5]: I think this bears out, too, in Old Media's
    [enthusiastic](http://www.thedaily.com/)
    [embrace](http://arstechnica.com/apple/news/2011/05/conde-nast-to-roll-out-ipad-subscriptions-starting-with-the-new-yorker.ars)
    of the iPad as a publishing platform, despite Apple's fairly
    draconian restrictions and price structure.
    

[^6]: Of course, Google, as a company, constitutionally embraces the web.
    

[^7]: I do have misgivings, though, about the "cloud" model, and giving up
    control of our data and identities to corporations.
