---
title: Rationality Engine
layout: blog-post
---


Paul Graham's [essay on
disagreement](http://paulgraham.com/disagree.html), the discussion C-Rob
started
[here](http://cgr.tumblr.com/post/3760719822/notes-toward-a-better-online-discussion-solution),
[an
interview](http://techzinglive.com/page/692/113-tz-interview-jeff-atwood-stack-exchange)
with [Jeff Atwood](http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/) I heard recently,
and a comment by Jake on GReader got me thinking about debate, though
really more about how debate is sort of an implementation of
rationality. Rationality, I think, is sort of self-evidently important,
but not easy. Humans have [natural cognitive
biases](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases) that are
hard to recognize, especially in oneself. Also, so much of our
collective brainpower and discussion is spent/wasted on faulty arguments
and corrections thereof. We could spend so much more of our cognition
and time more effectively if we could cut the argumentational fat.

So, how to learn to think more rationally? I idly peruse sites like
[Less Wrong](http://lesswrong.com/) and [Overcoming
Bias](http://www.overcomingbias.com/) and I often find the articles to
be interesting, but they're very often dry, difficult to digest, and
even more difficult to apply.

I think part of the problem is that while these places (and, I'm sure,
others) provide
[explicit/declarative](http://knol.google.com/k/explicit-vs-implicit-and-declarative-vs-procedural-language-learning)
knowledge, they don't provide implicit/procedural knowledge.

### Proposal: Rationality Fu[^1]

I would like to see a rationality engine, a collaborative, pedagogical
tool to encourage rational thinking. I think it would consist of the
following components:

1.  Khan Academy-style classes to teach the explicit concepts to
    include:
    1.  Symbolic logic
    2.  Logical fallacies.
    3.  Cognitive biases.
    4.  Statistics/statistical analysis.

2.  Exercises to test and enforce understanding.
3.  A game system[^2] to include:
    1.  Experience/karma and rank (or belts).
    2.  Achievements/badges.

4.  A discussion engine like the one C-Rob and I
    [discussed](http://cgr.tumblr.com/post/3760719822/notes-toward-a-better-online-discussion-solution#comment-163868512)
    to include:
    1.  Symbolically logical statement templates in which you can plug
        words to make an argument.
    2.  Threaded conversation with configurable/visualizable views.

* * * * *

Thinking in terms of symbolic logic can facilitate emotional
disengagement from a discussion, so that we can recognize our mistakes
and biases more clearly, and concede wrongheaded points more readily. I
think knowing about logical fallacies and cognitive biases doesn't
necessarily help us avoid them and I believe that thinking is action,
and rationality is habit. Having a system of discussion that exposes the
underlying mechanics of ideas can make our everyday thinking more clear
and more precise.

Higher-performance climbing shoes can improve your climbing but getting
stronger and learning technique are more pertinent and effective.
Similarly, we have many tools available to us to augment our thinking,
but more effective and more important would be for us to improve the
generative power: thinking itself.

I think we've harvested the low-hanging fruit of our cognitive symbiosis
with the internet. Time to climb the tree.[^3]

### Notes

[^1]: Think fu? Brain fu? 

[^2]: In the above-mentioned interview, Jeff Atwood, co-founder of Q&A
    site [Stack Exchange](http://stackexchange.com/) talks about how a
    little bit of gamification encouraged [the collaborative creation of
    an incredibly rich (the richest?) resource for
    programmers](http://stackoverflow.com/), both as a static repository
    for knowledge and as a place to get help from other users of the
    site. 

[^3]: Obviously a very small subset of the population at large would be at
    all interested in this idea, but I think it largely overlaps the set
    of people who like to think about difficult things to think about,
    as well as the set of people who like to debate things online.
