---
title: In Defense of the New Google Reader
layout: post
---

Brian Shih, a former PM for Google Reader, wrote [a scathing take-down
of the recent changes to Google Reader](http://brianshih.com/78073742)
on Monday.

And plenty of his criticisms are well deserved. It's certainly true that
the visual changes seem to prioritize consistency with the rest of
Google's visual redesign over the practical considerations of the
product.

I think the visual criticisms are ultimately pretty minor, though. There
were plenty of complaints about the preview of Gmail's recent user
interface changes as well, but in the official release, Google seems to
have addressed most of them. And Shih himself agrees that Google should
be trying to visually unify its products. Finally, let's not kid
ourselves: the old Reader was uglier, and not terribly more usable. It
was just what we got used to.[^1] Will Google eventually find the
right balance between visual consistency and actual usability? I'll
reserve judgment for now.

The real meat of Shih's criticism, though, is for the new sharing model.
Again, he agrees that Google *should* integrate Reader with Plus. But he
goes on to make some criticisms that don't fully take into account the
differences between the two products, and others that simply get the
facts wrong.

First, he complains that the new sharing flow makes sharing items
*harder*. Fair enough. But, as I wrote in [an earlier blog
post](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/10755504272/intimacy-and-performance-on-facebook),
this is purposeful. It adds friction at the point of sharing, makes you
pause to consider who the audience for this particular item is. Which is
how it should be.[^2]

Second, he complains that you must publicly +1 a post in order to share
it. This is incorrect, as he notes in an update.

Third, he complains at the lack of a transition from the old sharing
model to the new one under Google+. And this seems to be what
[many](http://kirbybits.wordpress.com/2011/10/21/wherein-i-try-to-explain-why-google-reader-is-the-best-social-network-created-so-far/)
people seem to be most angry about. Google Reader users are widely upset
that the communities that have organically grown in their feed reader
has disappeared. What these people forget is that the old sharing model
and the communities that formed in it were opaque, irrational, and hard
to control. Discoverability was basically nonexistent, loosely based on
your Gmail contacts. It was never very clear who could see your posts,
and it was never clear who could see the comments you make on posts.

The new sharing model, under Google+, is perfectly clear about who can
see your posts, who can see your comments, granular about who you can
share with, and gives you more control over comment moderation. In
short: it's better in every way.

I agree with Shih that it's unfortunate not to be able to consume shared
content from Reader. In fact, I'd go so far as to say I'd prefer to
consume, +1, and share all my content through Reader's interface, and
not have to visit the G+ site ever again.

The one glaring omission from the new sharing model to me is the
omission of an important point on [the spectrum
public-ness](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/582452757/webs-and-streams):
public but not broadcast. Under G+ now, if I want to share an item
publicly, I am also thrusting it in front of everyone who has me
circled. But sometimes I don't want to do that. Sometimes I want to
share something about bipedal robots, for example, that I don't care if
it's public, but I also don't want to stuff in everyone's feed who knows
me, for the same reason that I don't care if anyone knows about my fear
of bipedal robots, but I also don't bring them up in conversation with
everyone I meet.

What G+ needs is publicly subscribable Circles. These would be feeds
that you can post to that are public, but only people who have chosen to
subscribe to them can see. It fits nicely with the granularity of G+,
and adds the organic growth model of the old Reader in a much clearer
way.

Google is notorious for releasing new products that seem half-baked.
Only a few days after the public outcry over changes in Reader, there is
[a new
one](http://www.theverge.com/2011/11/2/2533292/gmail-app-iphone-ipad)
over the new native Gmail client for iOS. Google does this a lot. But it
also iterates on these products at a furious rate. And it appears to do
this in reponse to public feedback. Again, the new Gmail redesign has
addressed almost all of the initial criticisms as far as I can tell.
Which means the public outcry is good. It tells Google what to fix. I
just wish the outcry was over stuff that matters instead of what strikes
me as simple aversion to change.

[^1]: There were plenty of browser extensions and user styles that â€˜fixed'
    the old Google Reader appearance along many of precisely the ways
    Shih complains about here. 

[^2]: I do also lament the removal of keyboard shortcuts, but I assume
    they'll be added back in soon.
