---
title: "Project: Depth"
layout: post
---

I don't particularly enjoy traditional social settings like bars or
parties. Partly this is because I can't hear very well, especially when
there's a lot of background noise. But probably a more important reason
is that I feel like a lot of the conversation that happens in these
settings isn't productive. Not productive in the sense of making me
money or advancing civilization, but in the sense of making us
understand each other better on a more than superficial level, or in the
sense of enlightening us or engaging us to some significant depth. From
my perspective, most of the idle chatter that happens in these settings
are basically overhead. Not all of it. And I understand that some people
prefer superficial conversation, so it's not overhead for them. Some
people enjoy eating bread by itself; to me, bread is for holding meat.

I prefer and seek depth in my endeavors. I'm starting to think it's my
overarching project. I think it's what all my various little projects
have been about: Breakfast, the various incarnations of Since the War,
the party chat, NMBC, EMDN, and now EMSN.[^1] It's also what
motivates my thoughts on social networks, browsers, etc, as well as on
user interfaces and the rationality engine.

Depth is my project.

And since this blog is basically a brain-dump, and that's what I spend
most of my idle cycles on, I guess that's mostly what this blog's about.

There are two separate vectors of depth that I think about:

1. Depth of experience. I refer to the immersive experience, in which
    you are so engrossed in your artifact that when you are interrupted,
    it's as disorienting as waking up in an unfamiliar place from a
    vivid dream. This experience can come in many forms. For me, it's
    usually reading (novels, essays, and long form journalism), but
    often films and sometimes video games
    ([Ico](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ico) comes to mind).

2. Depth of connection. Conversations can be engrossing, too. They can
    also enlighten (sometimes mutually), expand (in the transitive sense
    of the word), and increase intimacy. This is true both off- and
    online. And online, the internet equivalent of idle chatter is
    shallow interaction--snarky comments, likes, pithy aphorisms, how-to
    articles, etc. (This is not to say that shallow interaction has no
    value. It does[^2], but again, I like meat.)

### There are oceans to explore, but we stay in puddles.

The problem of the proliferation of shallow communication is more
fundamental than the implementation of currently popular social
networks. I'm starting to see it as three parts:

1. Human nature. People have short attention spans and are easily
    distracted. They are also incredibly susceptible to Skinnerian
    novelty-seeking behavior. (Also, many or most people genuinely
    prefer shallow breadth, or even just shallows.)

2. The architecture of the web. The web is made of hyperlinks. Any
    given page generally points to many other pages. If you imagine that
    the goal of reading a web page is to read it all the way through
    from start to finish, the page itself fights you by giving you many
    orthogonal avenues along the way.[^3]

3. Currently viable online business models. Web pages make money by
    distracting you, either by getting you to look at an ad or by
    getting you to click on one. As long as advertising drives the web,
    and advertisers measure success in page views, this isn't going to
    change.

### Look forward, not backward; upward, not forward.

There are huge, Lovecraftian commercial forces at work, with a vested
interest in keeping our attention spans short, and our feedback loops
shorter. These forces feed on 'eyeballs' and 'clicks' and measure us in
aggregate. It seems unlikely that we can change that.

But there are countervailing forces. Some commercial ones, like
[Flickr](http://flickr.com) and [Stack
Exchange](http://stackexchange.com/),[^4] harness the power of
communities to dig deep mines of richness on the web. Others are
non-commercial, like Wikipedia. Many come from people scratching their
own itches: [Readability](https://www.readability.com/) and
[Instapaper](http://www.instapaper.com), made by and for people who
wanted to be able to read web writing without the now conventional
distractions of modern web design; any number of anti-procrastination
applications that block your internet connection for specified periods
of time to improve task focus; and services like
[longform.org](http://longform.org/) and
[delivereads](http://delivereads.com/) that encourage deep reading of
long form journalism. Physical devices that enable depth are becoming
wildly popular: the Kindle is an obvious example, as is the iPad, which,
despite [my
misgivings](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/5442955515/holding-the-web-in-your-hands),
enables an unprecedented immersion experience by presenting an intuitive
and emotionally satisfying interaction model. And of course there are
[others](http://cognitivesocialweb.com/home/2011/6/7/on-the-purpose-and-the-engine-of-the-web.html)
thinking about the same problems.

We are all naturally insular to some degree. We are all anxious,
novelty-seeking apes. We are buoyant, in the working metaphor. And there
are two ways to dive deeper: learn to hold our breath longer; and make
tools to so we don't have to. Can't hurt to try both.

### Notes

[^1]: I'm not trying to take all the credit for all of these, just
    explicating my underlying reason for participating.
    
[^2]: I find the concept of "ambient intimacy" to be an interesting one.
    
[^3]: There's a lot more here, like the fact that the internet is
    basically a custom tailored novelty aggregator and interruption
    machine, but others have covered this exhaustively, I think.
    Probably the canonical example is Nicholas Carr's [*The Shallows:
    What the Internet is Doing to Our
    Brains*](http://www.amazon.com/Shallows-What-Internet-Doing-Brains/dp/0393072223).
    
[^4]: Probably not deep on either of the vectors I've enumerated, but
    Stack Exchange was built as a direct response to the shallow
    cesspool of technical knowledge that was available on the internet.
    It maybe represents a third vector: depth of information?
