---
title: Intimacy is Performance
layout: post
---

I was surprised to find a lot of interesting discussion around [my last
post about Intimacy and Performance on
Facebook](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/10755504272/intimacy-and-performance-on-facebook).
Some of it was about the distinction between ‘intimacy' and
‘performance' and a lot was about
[mediated](http://www.susansontag.com/SusanSontag/books/onPhotographyExerpt.shtml)
[experience](http://smarterware.org/8584/joe-moon-on-facebooks-new-timeline-feature).
Both of the discussion tracks got me thinking about our relationship to
communication technology.

We can measure the progress of communication technology in two ways:

-   The reduction of physical limits on social interaction.
-   The increase of signal fidelity of digital communication to
    pre-technological social communication.

Inventions like writing, telegraphy, telephony, etc. break down the
limits of physical interactions geographically and temporally, but each
introduces new limits. Telephony, for example, broke down the barrier of
distance, but introduced limits of one-to-one and voice-only. As
telephony and its replacements improved, these introduced limits
disappeared. With group video chat technology, we can now have fairly
high-fidelity social experiences across long distances without those
early limits, and we can safely expect the fidelity to continue to
increase.

### Intimacy is Performance

At least part of the reason I posed a distinction between intimacy and
performance in my last post is that that's one of the limits that our
technology imposes on our social interactions. Offline, intimacy is much
easier to understand as a subset of performance: performance in a
smaller context. In our analog social interactions, we have many
different contexts that overlap in complex ways, and we perform slightly
differently in all of them. In the context of close friends and family,
that performance is called ‘intimacy.'

### Limits

Earlier communication technologies were easier to understand and adopt
because they were simpler, and they more easily mapped to physical
interactions. Letter correspondence and telephony were easy to
understand as versions of a face to face conversation. Email, SMS, and
chat are similarly easy to understand. But the increasingly complex
world of online social networking does not map to the offline very well.

Chris Poole, founder of 4chan,
[provided](http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/4chans_chris_poole_facebook_google_are_doing_it_wr.php)
one interesting criticism at Web 2.0 conference, which @dannygilligan
[sums up
nicely](https://twitter.com/#!/dannygilligan/statuses/126075365318852608)
on Twitter: "Sharing on the web not a question of who you share with but
who you share as." But that's only half-correct. The fact is, offline
these two concepts "who you share with" and "who you share as" are
really the same thing: context. It's only online that they're separated
artificially, and this asymmetry is one of the limits of the digital
social medium.

Many of these limits are ones of sharp distinction: [between private and
public; and between one-to-one and
one-to-all](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/582452757/webs-and-streams).
While things like email lists made the representation of different
contexts possible, they didn't make it easy or frictionless. Facebook
and Google+, with their respective list features, each take a step
toward removing some of the friction by offering more granular contexts,
but these steps are not big or particularly inspired ones.

Even with Google+ Circles, to take an example, the asymmetricality and
nonobviousness of the social context places friction on every
interaction. When you post to a Circle, you decide what your context is.
But when you comment on someone else's post, it takes some work to
figure out the context, and thus, your behavior. That's friction. This
is what I was trying to get at with an earlier
[post](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/7072771434/a-new-metaphor-for-social-networking)
on ‘place' as a more intuitive metaphor for social networking.

Context is something that might be hard to think about when implementing
a social network, precisely because it's so ubiquitous, obvious, and
unconscious in an offline setting. But these are reasons why it should
be a prime consideration for any online social interaction service.

### Digital Augmentation of Social Interaction

Of course, in the digital medium, there are many novel concepts that
simply can't be analogized to offline interactions easily. The fact of a
permanently and publicly accessible record of interactions is the most
obvious one. The spectrum of publicity is another. I would argue that
the spaces on that spectrum that digital media open up to us are
genuinely enriching and useful. It means, for example, that @mention
conversations on Twitter, which aren't broadcast (don't appear in
followers' timelines with exceptions) but are publicly accessible if you
look for them, provide access to an entire category of information on
the internet that was never available before.

I think these are the type of technological innovations that are drastic
enough, i.e. don't map well enough to previous paradigms, that they
represent inevitable shifts in the culture. It's hard to recognize calls
for a new ‘forgetfulness' on the internet as anything other than
nostalgic Ludditism, at least for me. I think making social context
clear through user interfaces will mitigate some of these effects. For
example, a permanent record of statements you make within a specific
context will only ever be available to others who share that context, so
the eternal memory of the internet doesn't matter as much as the eternal
memory of the public internet. But some of the digital age's affordances
will be drastically culture-changing, not features or bugs, but simply
facts of digital life.

### Presence

There are also more ambiguous artifacts of digital representation. The
combination of ubiquitous access and time-shifting capabilities afforded
by the internet blur the old distinction between real-time presence
(face to face, telephone) and correspondence (letters, email, SMS).
There is now more of a spectrum of synchronous to asynchronous
communication, with some technologies, like Twitter and chat, existing
on a broad range of it.[^1]

### Collapse

It seems pretty clear to me that as digital identity and analog identity
become increasingly collapsed, the notion of presence will resolve away
from binary states and toward a constantly fluctuating analog amount. We
will always be available for digital communication at some level, but we
will be more or less digitally present depending on what we're doing and
what kind of access we have at any given point. This is already true
enough that the idea of going completely ‘off the grid' for some amount
of time is increasingly popular and we are already starting develop
[social
norms](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/12/12/fashion/12THISLIFE.html?pagewanted=all)
on behavior related to immediate level of physical-digital presence.

Nathan Jurgenson, who writes about "[digital
dualism](http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2011/02/24/digital-dualism-versus-augmented-reality/)"
on [his blog](http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/), emphasizes that
the distinction is artificial.[^2] I sort of disagree. I think
the virtual is currently another context with varying degrees of overlap
with other contexts, just as ‘work' and ‘home' and ‘friends' are
different contexts. And somewhat paradoxically, I think the distinction
of ‘digital' as a separate context will fade and collapse as our digital
tools more accurately represent the distinctions of our offline
contexts.

But I don't think publicity-pushing policies like Facebook's help to
close the gaps of digital dualism. Facebook's goal is to obliterate
context online by defaulting everything to public. If anything, this
abuse of users' trust is driving them to compartmentalize their digital
lives more. It drives them toward more conscious and more active
management of their digital identities, which is the exact opposite of
what Facebook wants.

The problem left to solve is removing the friction of cognition involved
in placing yourself in and managing your social context.

### Further Reading

1.  [Alexis Madrigal on
    identity](http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/10/does-facebook-emphasize-the-me-or-the-i/246467/).
2.  [danah boyd](http://www.danah.org/)'s
    [thesis](http://smg.media.mit.edu/people/danah/thesis/) on "Managing
    representation in a digital world."

### Notes

[^1]: Fascinating research by danah boyd on teenagers' risk reduction
    strategies on Facebook.
    http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2010/11/08/risk-reduction-strategies-on-facebook.html
    

[^2]: [William Gibson on the subject of
    cyborgs](http://www.williamgibsonbooks.com/archive/2003_01_28_archive.asp):
    "The real cyborg, cybernetic organism in the broader sense, had been
    busy arriving as I watched DR. SATAN on that wooden television in 1952. I was becoming a part of something, in the act of watching
    that screen. We all were. We are today. The human species was
    already in process of growing itself an extended communal nervous
    system, then, and was doing things with it that had previously been
    impossible: viewing things at a distance, viewing things that had
    happened in the past, watching dead men talk and hearing their
    words. What had been absolute limits of the experiential world had
    in a very real and literal way been profoundly and amazingly
    altered, extended, changed. And would continue to be. And the real
    marvel of this was how utterly we took it all for granted.

    Science fiction's cyborg was a literal chimera of meat and machine.
    The world's cyborg was an extended human nervous system: film,
    radio, broadcast television, and a shift in perception so profound
    that I believe we're yet to understand it. Watching television, we
    each became aspects of an electronic brain. We became augmented. In
    the Eighties, when Virtual Reality was the buzzword, we were
    presented with images of…television! If the content is sufficiently
    engrossing, however, you don't need wraparound deep-immersion
    goggles to shut out the world. You grow your own. You are there.
    Watching the content you most want to see, you see nothing else.

    The physical union of human and machine, long dreaded and long
    anticipated, has been an accomplished fact for decades, though we
    tend not to see it. We tend not to see it because we are it, and
    because we still employ Newtonian paradigms that tell us that
    "physical" has only to do with what we can see, or touch. Which of
    course is not the case. The electrons streaming into a child's eye
    from the screen of the wooden television are as physical as anything
    else. As physical as the neurons subsequently moving along that
    child's optic nerves. As physical as the structures and chemicals
    those neurons will encounter in the human brain. We are implicit,
    here, all of us, in a vast physical construct of artificially linked
    nervous systems. Invisible. We cannot touch it.

    We are it. We are already the Borg, but we seem to need myth to
    bring us to that knowledge." 


