---
title: Touch UI is not the future of everything.
layout: post
---

Apple beat even the most optimistic expectations and sold over 15
million iPads in the first year of its release, and it looks like the
second version is just around the corner. The competitors are lining up
as well: the Motorola Xoom, running Android 3.0 Honeycomb, the HP
PalmPad, and the RIM Playbook all look like interesting
offerings.[^1]

Many have pointed out the sad irony of the fact that Microsoft, who has
been pushing tablet PCs for over a decade, seems to have by far the
least compelling offering, and no apparent serious road map for future
products that address the deficiencies of desktop Windows on a tablet
form factor. Historically, Microsoft's tablet and even smartphone
operating systems have been desktop Windows pared down (and barely, in
the case of tablets) for use with a stylus. I had a convertible laptop,
in fact, and though I was excited about the idea, it never really worked
that well, for reasons I was never able to articulate.

In the aftermath of iOS, the reasons are pretty obvious.

There were many aspects of the iPhone that revolutionized and redefined
the smartphone market. The iTunes and iPod ecosystem certainly helped.
So did apps (though third party apps didn't come until later, so didn't
really contribute to the initial popularity), and so did Apple's
traditional focus on hardware design. But the single largest and most
revolutionary factor of the iPhone's (and the iPod Touch's as well as
the iPad's) success was the user interface. Apple designed the UI around
a new paradigm of touch and direct manipulation, shining a light on how
elegantly simple, refreshing, and intuitive human-computer interaction
could be. The dominant paradigm shifted and now the measure of a
smartphone UI basically boils down to how well the paradigm is
executed.[^2]

Apple's touch interface allowed the dismissal of many of the
abstractions that people found difficult about computing: Buttons took a
step away from metaphor and toward the physical as did navigation and
scrolling. Diminishing these abstraction-distances made the idea of
transforming the device into the specific running application more
feasible and more emotionally satisfying.

While it makes complete and and perfect sense to collapse the
distinction between input/control and display for a mobile device like a
smartphone because by their nature these devices are constrained by
their form, I would argue that it makes less sense as the device gets
larger. Larger devices (including, arguably, current iPad-sized tablets)
are fatiguing to use for long periods of time, heavy to hold up and
ergonomically unsound. Occlusion can also be a problem.[^3] As
[this UI concept video](http://10gui.com/ "10/GUI") demonstrates, these
problems get bigger with the device. On a real workstation, these
problems become intractable.

With OS X 10.7 Lion, Apple wants to bring many of the things that make
iOS appealing to the desktop. For certain aspects, this is great: saving
application/document states, abstraction of the file system,
simplification of application management, etc. For other aspects, the
results are ambiguous: disappearing scroll bars and reversing the
direction of two-finger scrolling, for example. To take the latter
example, Apple is attempting to bring desktop multitouch gestures closer
to the iOS counterparts. In 10.6 dragging two fingers down on the
trackpad scrolls down a page. In 10.7, the same gesture scrolls up, just
as would happen if you were to touch an iPhone's screen and drag down.
There isn't necessarily a correct way to do this (it reminds me of the
change of the default in mouse-look direction in first person shooters),
but it's weird to change an established convention in a way that's not
really any more intuitive. The intractable problem here is that a direct
manipulation paradigm is fundamentally different from an indirect one,
and trying to force one onto the other creates a bad experience.

Still other paradigms Apple is trying to bring from iOS to the desktop
are just bad. Full screen applications, for example, are perfectly
sensible on a handheld, size-constrained device (and maybe even on
smaller laptops), but on a world of large desktop screens, it only
restricts the interface artificially. It's also really strange to see
Apple embrace this concept now when it makes the least sense after so
many of years of denying it completely.

Just as Microsoft tried to force the desktop's indirect manipulation UI
paradigm onto devices where a direct manipulation UI would have been
more appropriate, and suffered for it, Apple seems to be trying to do
the exact opposite. There's no denying that Apple is the uncontested
thought-leader in computer UI, which is why I'd be much more interested
in seeing them offer new ideas in desktop UI with the very different
inherent ergonomic constraints of the desktop environment in mind. The
above-linked 10/GUI concept is still the most compelling I've seen with
these considerations in mind. Especially with successive generations
growing up with ubiquitous technology, I really don't think dumbing down
our interactions with computers is helpful.

### Notes

[^1]: I'm not particularly interested in tablets because I always feel
    restricted even on laptops. To me, the tablet is an even more
    restricted laptop, one that's built much more for consumption than
    production. For a portable, I'm much more interested in the MacBook
    Air. 

[^2]: Android's primary influence before the iPhone was the Blackberry.
    WebOS and Windows Phone 7 are widely regarded as excellent UIs (at
    least conceptually), while Blackberry OS's half-hearted attempt to
    convert to a touch paradigm is widely panned.
    

[^3]: Good app design can mitigate this, but not eliminate it.
