---
title: Intimacy and Performance on Facebook
layout: post
alias: /post/10755504272/intimacy-and-performance-on-facebook
---

Facebook launched three interesting new features last Thursday:
Timeline, Ticker, and Open Graph.

### Timeline

Timeline is a replacement for the profile page that collects and
displays your Facebook status updates, photos, links, etc. in a clean,
easily perusable way. One of the first things I thought of after seeing
[the announcement](http://www.facebook.com/about/timeline), was [this
"Dear Sophie" ad](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GIHq8nry9hY) from
Google.

Superficially, they're very similar. Both showcase the use of technology
to capture meaningful events and share them. Even the types of
relationships and events are similar. But the different presentations
betray an important distinction in purpose between the two sets of
services.

The "Dear Sophie" ad shows technology in service of creating records and
sharing moments in an intimate way, and ends with the sentiment: "The
web is what you make of it." While the Timeline promotional video shows
similar vignettes, [Mark Zuckerberg's
presentation](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v67PFmVvqDs) closes the
video with: "Timeline is the story of your life. It has three pieces:
all your stories, your apps and a new way to express who you are."

In other words, while "Dear Sophie" is an expression of an intimate set
of messages from one individual to another, the Timeline is an
aggregated set of shared moments, collected in the service of public
display, an artifact of self-expression and identity. And what I find
jarring about this formulation is the same thing that bothers me about
the alarming trend of weddings in which the photographers and
videographers have free reign, even during the ceremony, in order to get
the best, most cinematic record of the event, at the expense of the
event itself and everyone participating. It's a conflation of the record
of the event with the event itself, or even a privileging of the record
over what gives the record its meaning and power. At the same time it
(ingeniously) adds to the pressure to record all meaningful events on
Facebook in order to make sure it becomes part of your
identity.[^1]

### Ticker and Open Graph

Open Graph adds a way for Facebook apps and Web sites to make updates
for you in various ways. For example, if you give it the proper
permissions, the newly integrated Spotify app will automatically share
each new song you listen to. But these updates don't go into your main
newsfeed, they go instead into the Ticker, a new area on your Facebook
page that shows a running update of your friends' auto-shared activities
online. Other examples of Ticker activity include: reading an article,
watching a video, playing a game.

Zuckerberg refers to this as "frictionless sharing," a dream of a kind
of meta-panopticon with which everyone can see what everyone else is
doing in real time. There are parts of this that I actually find kind of
compelling. The Ticker is a nod toward "[ambient
intimacy](http://www.disambiguity.com/ambient-intimacy/)" the idea that
you can approximate the low-level intimacy of occupying the same space
as someone, in a digital way.

But, by being public, the Ticker fails at achieving intimacy. Because if
being in the same room with someone creates intimacy, being in the same
room as everyone creates the opposite. It turns all of your activity
into performance. And what
[many](http://thisismynext.com/2011/09/25/facebook-frictionless-sharing-timeline-panopticon/)
have hinted at is that removing friction from sharing just displaces
that friction. If everything I do on the web is under the public gaze, I
have to reflect for a moment before I take any action -- before I listen
to a song, watch a video, play a game, or *click* on a link. It simply
moves the friction from sharing onto the activity, in the worst kind of
self-censorial way.[^2][^3]

This is especially true in combination with the Timeline, which
aggregates Ticker activity into "a new way to express who you are." Not
only does the Open Graph and the Ticker turn your online activity into a
performance, it then turns that performance into your very identity.

### Intimacy vs. Performance

Both intimacy and performance are important parts of what makes social
networks like Facebook compelling. Initially, the performance part was
the profile, where you listed your biographical information, your likes
and dislikes, your expressions of identity (in the narrow ways that
Facebook allowed). The performance part was important for discovering
new people and expanding your network, for actually forming the
connections. The intimacy part was pretty much everything else: your
status updates, messages, comments, photos, and videos. It consisted of
the kind of stuff in the two videos above. It was what injected meaning
into those connections that you'd made.

At every turn, Facebook seems to have subverted the intimacy of social
experiences by turning them into public performances. Not only has the
intimacy of what was once private slowly eroded into the public, but
more and more of Facebook users' online activity is being drawn into the
performative identity. If an anthropomorphized Facebook had a Facebook
profile, its Timeline would show a clear progression of updates that
moves from mostly private toward all public, all the time.

The worst part is that I don't think this has the effect that Facebook
wants. I don't think a frog-boiling style of slow erosion of privacy
means people just continue to share in the same way except in public. It
means that the people who understand what's going on become wary, stop
trusting, and eventually stop using the service. And people who don't
understand what's happening will eventually hit situations in which
something doesn't work the way they thought it did (often
embarrassingly), and the uncertainty of their mental model will result
in less usage and make that usage more tentative and more careful.

Ultimately, it just means less intimacy. Less signal. Less of exactly
what this kind of technology is supposed to enable.

### Further Reading

[Not Sharing is Caring](http://www.slate.com/id/2304425/), Farhad Manjoo

[It's the end of the web as we know
it](http://adrianshort.co.uk/2011/09/25/its-the-end-of-the-web-as-we-know-it/),
Adrian Short

### Notes

[^1]: There's a lot more to unpack about this, but that would be another
    essay, and I think others are saying it better than I can. For
    example: [@boone](https://twitter.com/#!/boone): [The idea that life
    narrative should be loosely joined out of small anecdotal pieces
    over long periods of time is a non-trivial
    thesis.](https://twitter.com/#!/boone/statuses/118794804510466048)
    (There's more good stuff in his tweet stream.)
    

[^2]: While it's true that you have to explicitly white-list apps that
    post to your Ticker, the uncertainty about whether the next click
    will be public or not that results from any sort of auto-sharing
    system is almost worse than everything being public.
    

[^3]: It seems pertinent to note that Google+ actually *adds* friction to
    sharing by making you explicitly think about which Circle to share
    to with every item. Which, I submit, is precisely where you want
    friction in a sharing interface that respects your privacy.
