---
title: An Amateur's Lament
layout: post
---

Amazon's [advertisement for the Kindle
Fire](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jUtmOApIslE) opens with a Voltaire
quote:

> The instruction we find in books is like fire. We fetch it from our
> neighbors, kindle it at home, communicate it to others, and it becomes
> property of all.

### Visions of the Future

Taken from a certain angle, the metaphor makes sense. There's a
[Promethean](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prometheus) ideal of content --
music, movies, books -- no longer constrained by the physical media of
the past, and no longer subject to the old Olympian gate-keepers: record
labels, Hollywood, and publishers. The promise of these devices is
accessibility of content to all. The killer feature of each one is the
price, which is aggressive to begin with and, if the past is any
indicator, subject to relentless and continuous cuts.

Apple has a similar vision of the future but approaches from the
opposite direction. It's more an offer of luxury to the masses, a
democratization of high-end design. But the result is basically the
same. The emphasis is on the device itself, but it's a vision of
technological access made available to everyone.

Both utopian visions, though, hide the threat of dystopia not far
underneath the surface, as utopian visions often do. In the case of
Apple's "post-PC" devices, it's a subtle one, hidden in the very
experience that makes the devices attractive.

### Production and Consumption

The iPad is physically not much more than a touchscreen, which is
primarily just a screen with the addition of an input system. While the
direct-manipulation paradigm is indisputably more intuitive, it's also
[less
robust](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/9325300749/a-different-kind-of-gui).
You simply can't get the precision of a mouse, or the tactile feedback
of a physical keyboard. It's a user-interface optimized for consumption
and shallow interactions like navigation. Which isn't to say that it's
impossible to create things on an iPad; there are plenty of examples to
the contrary. But its primary purpose is for output, not input, unlike
the general-purpose PC. The iPad implicitly privileges consumption over
production. So insofar as these post-PC devices will replace PCs, the
market- and mindshare of consumption-oriented devices will grow at the
expense of production-oriented ones.

### Distribution Control

Amazon's proposition with the Kindle line is subtly different. While the
Kindle (which term I use generically hereafter to refer to the entire
line of Kindles, including the e-book readers and the Kindle Fire) is
openly a pure consumption device, it's also cheap enough to be offered
as a supplement to PCs as opposed to a replacement. Their purpose is
narrow: to remove all friction from the consumption of digital media.
Amazon, as a retail company, is trying to aggressively commoditize its
complements while controlling the distribution channel.

For Amazon to make money through this model, though, everything has to
flow through Amazon. And with how much of the e-book retail business
Amazon already controls, it's an outcome that doesn't seem unlikely.
With a free month's subscription to Amazon's Prime service with every
purchase of a Kindle Fire, they're instructing consumers on how to
easily stream movies from their catalog and buy music directly in
addition to buying everything else, from toilet paper to power tools.
Meanwhile, music streaming services are becoming more popular. The
inexorable trend seems to be toward subscription services for
everything. It isn't difficult to imagine a future in which you can play
a flat rate to Amazon for access to an all-you-can-eat streaming service
for all content: music, magazines, newspapers, books, movies, tv shows;
all on free hardware ranging from e-ink devices, tablets, set-top boxes
(hooked up to televisions bought from Amazon with one click and 2-day
shipping).

### Centralization

In Apple's vision of the future, you buy apps and content on iTunes,
which you consume on your various iDevices. In Amazon's, you get a free
Kindle with a subscription to Amazon Prime, and stream all your content.
The real price of the ease and ubiquity of access offered by both of
these companies is centralization of control. These visions represent a
step backward into our recent past of broadcast media, with a few
powerful entities acting as gatekeepers to our collective culture. Which
may seem inoffensive if you prefer curated, professionally produced
content anyway. But then you might realize that Apple plays an actively
censorial role in its App Store. You might find that Amazon has
bizarrely tone-deaf and comically ironic behavior in its recent past,
like remotely deleting purchased copies of George Orwell's *1984* from
Kindles.

The most frightening and subversive part of Amazon's strategy to me is
the Silk Browser. While offering the proposition of a better browsing
experience, Amazon has begun to insinuate itself into our great
decentralizing force: the World Wide Web.

It is perhaps simply the historical cycle of a new technology's
decentralizing force dissipating into subsequent centralized control
described by Tim Wu in *[The Master Switch](http://timwu.org/)*.

### Lamentation

My lament, then, is for the dying bazaar. For the crushed dream of the
blogging revolution, replaced by closed and proprietary systems like
Facebook. For the notion of putting the means of production into the
hands of the masses, replaced by ubiquitous and unimaginably slick
consumption devices. For a flourishing chaos of freely exchanged ideas,
curated, ranked, and sorted by people, organizations, and algorithms
that are themselves curated, ranked, and sorted. For a more
participatory World Wide Web.

### An Alternative Vision of the Future

Not that it's over. As I've noted
[before](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/166900257/why-i-trust-google),
Google is a huge and powerful engineering monastery that has a symbiotic
relationship with the Web and DNA consisting of decentralized production
and distribution. And there are plenty of smaller efforts to make the
Web a competitive endeavor, as well certain types of participatory
[depth](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/6542036868/project-depth) and
richness of experience that only the Web can provide. And we've only
begun to see the new frontier of possible decentralized business models
for content production afforded by the open Web.

Looking around the Web, though, it's not that hard to understand why
people might seek refuge in closed systems. A lot of it is unavoidable.
Some places on the Web will always be cesspools. But there are some
matters of convention we can change by consensus to make the Web a
better, more participatory place that encourages deep, serious thought
and collaboration as well as frivolous ephemera. There are ways to
optimize reading, civil discussion, and community-building. And the
beauty of a consensual, conventional system is that I just have to
convince enough people that this is worth doing.

### More Reading on Apple

-   ["Done with Apple"](http://teleogistic.net/2011/10/done-with-apple/)
    by Boone B Gorges
-   ["Disneyland of
    computers"](https://freedom-to-tinker.com/blog/felten/ipad-disneyland-computers)
    by Ed Felten

### More Reading on Amazon

-   [Interview of Amazon CEO Jeff
    Bezos](http://www.wired.com/magazine/2011/11/ff_bezos/all/1) by
    Steven Levy
-   ["What Would Happen if Amazon Ruled
    Publishing?"](http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2011/10/what-would-happen-if-amazon-ruled-publishing/246854/)
    by Rebecca J. Rosen
-   ["The E-Reader of Sand: The Kindle and the Inner Conflict Between
    Consumer and
    Booklover,"](http://www.themillions.com/2011/08/the-e-reader-of-sand-the-kindle-and-the-inner-conflict-between-consumer-and-booklover.html)
    Mark O'Connell on the Kindle as Borgesian "Book of Sand"

### More Reading on "Post-PC"

-   Hacker News thread on ["Why I'm scared of the post-PC
    era."](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3113192)
-   Hacker News thread on ["The post-PC
    era"](http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=2955472)
-   ["The PC is dead. Why no angry
    nerds?"](http://futureoftheinternet.org/the-pc-is-dead-why-no-angry-nerds)
    by Jonathan Zittrain

### More Reading

-   ["World without web"](http://esr.ibiblio.org/?p=3335) by Eric S.
    Raymond
-   Tim Wu on [*The Master
    Switch*](http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/11/14/one-on-one-tim-wu-author-of-the-master-switch/)

