---
title: Google's Existential Crisis
layout: post
---

Google's success was founded on the execution[^1] of two
innovations: 1. Leveraging the hyperlink to create the best index (i.e.
crowd-sourcing); and 2. Targeting advertising to search results to
monetize that index. Apparent diversification into new areas like
content (YouTube) and operating systems (Android and Chrome OS) can be
understood to exist in service to the two founding innovations. These
driving principles are Google's DNA, and as successful as the company
has been, if there are fundamental problems with these two principles,
it could mean trouble for the company, and trouble for the web at large,
to the extent that Google is good for it.

### The Algorithm

The search engine's ranking algorithm, PageRank, measures 'relevancy.'
It began with the simple insight that the more links there are to a
particular page, the more important it is, but the algorithm very
quickly became increasingly sophisticated, and it now considers ["more
than 500 million variables and 2 billion
terms."](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PageRank#Description)

Google's relationship with the web is symbiotic. The web became useable
in no small part because Google made it possible to find relevant
things. As the web became more important, so did Google. And as Google
became more important, it also became a bigger target. Search engine
optimization became a prominent and diverse industry that ranges from
qualified professionals exhorting legitimate and sanctioned best
practices to cargo cultists offering opaque rituals to increase search
result rankings. Orthogonally, companies like Demand Media began to mine
real-time search data and hire cheap labor to create abundant shallow
content, exploiting holes in the web to make money on ads. Recently, it
even
[seemed](http://searchengineland.com/demand-medias-ipo-the-google-seo-aspects-48286)
like such 'content farms' could rise to become an existential threat to
Google by degrading search results into meaninglessness.

This shows Google's symbiosis with the web to be profoundly weird in a
Heisenbergian way: Google cannot observe the web without changing it.
Search engine optimizers and content farms both respond to Google's
algorithm. SEO changes the way publishers create and present data, as
well as what content they produce. Content farms form a more directly
parasitic relationship, because as search traffic data exposes demand
for content, they produce it. But as Google's relevancy algorithm
increases the measure for quality, the quality of content changes to fit
those criteria. This puts Google in the strange position of being able
to invoke content by defining what is of high quality. Which presents a
problem analogous to the one of standardized testing: it shifts
incentives to 'teach to the test' instead of to teach what's important.
The simple solution is that if you can make a test good enough, the
incentives will align properly.[^2]

As the test-maker, Google becomes in no small way the arbiter of truth.
The tension that this forms between Google and the content farm industry
describes a sort of Turing arms race: the growing ability of content
farms to cheaply produce content in an increasingly automatic fashion
pushes against the escalating precision of Google's quality algorithm.
The inevitable conclusion of this process is automatically generated,
demand-invoked content that's indistinguishable or better than anything
people can provide.

Not only that, but in [December
2009](http://searchengineland.com/google-now-personalizes-everyones-search-results-31195),
Google began to personalize search results according to users'
locations, search histories, social graphs, etc. As the search profile
becomes more extensive, the personal search algorithm becomes more
intensely personal, and an 'objective,' One True Search ceases to exist.

As I've discussed
[before](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/166900257/why-i-trust-google),
Google's incentives are such that it wants to increase use of the web,
broadly. This is good, as long as the web is good, however you define
that. But as its power to create the web (or at least influence it)
waxes, so does its responsibility. It's not hard to imagine a dystopian
future where the entire web devolves into a broad, shallowly addictive
ad-ridden hell (this already describes some sectors of the web). Google
would have to have an extremely long-term outlook to decide to serve as
superego instead of as id to the web. But [maybe that's not so hard to
imagine](http://searchengineland.com/video-inside-googles-self-driving-cars-66806)
either.

### Ads

Google famously makes the vast majority of its money on advertising,
specifically with its AdWords program, which auctions keywords to
advertisers. The key to the program's success is its highly targeted
nature, i.e. the relevance of the advertisements.[^3] The weird
tension here is that the quality of the search results is in conflict
with the quality of search ads. If the search results are perfect, and
exactly what the user wants every time, then there's no need for her to
ever bother with advertisements. Conversely, if the product being
advertised is maximally relevant, then it should be her first search
result anyway. Advertisements only offer value to a user if their
relevance has parity with search's. But they only offer value to an
advertiser if they are exposed where they wouldn't be organically, i.e.
where they are irrelevant, or distracting.

The other tension is one that stems from something I briefly touched on
in [another
post](http://blog.byjoemoon.com/post/6542036868/project-depth): Google
wants to encourage quality in the web and provide a good user experience
so that people continue to use the web and its services. Simultaneously,
Google wants to extract the most value from the user by exposing her to
the most ads, i.e. distracting her. Minimally distracting ads would be
nonexistent ones and maximally useful services would be ad-free.
Conversely, maximally value-extracting services would be all ads all the
time. The two incentives of quality and distraction are directly
opposed. The result of this cognitive dissonance is what we see when we
use Google products: generally tasteful, useful, and understated ads.

So when Google places relevant ads, advertisers are in some sense paying
Google simply to do its job. But when Google places irrelevant ads, it
undermines the quality of the web, its search results, and its user
experience. And maybe the scariest part of this to me is that the
quality incentive is one conceptual remove farther than the distraction
one.

Maybe it's no more perverse than any company's tension between making
the highest quality product in order to invoke desire and spending the
least amount of money possible in its production. And maybe Google is
culturally constituted to thinking in uniquely long-term ways that
ultimately make everyone better off. The recent battle with SEO-driven
content farms that resulted in the ['Panda'
update](http://searchengineland.com/why-google-panda-is-more-a-ranking-factor-than-algorithm-update-82564)
to the search algorithm would seem to indicate so.[^4] But I
imagine it's easy to think long-term when you're succeeding. We'll see
what happens when the success inevitably slows.

### Notes

[^1]: Google's ranking algorithm was based on earlier ideas: [citation
    analysis](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Citation_analysis) and
    [Hyperlink-Induced Topic Search
    (HITS)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HITS_algorithm).
    

[^2]: I'm not competent to speak to whether that's possible in either
    case. 

[^3]: The auction part, which helps Google maximize its profits, is also
    really important, but I would say secondarily so.
    

[^4]: More cynically, you could call it a response to growing criticism
    about search quality. 
