---
title: Git
layout: doc-page
---

Download and Install the git client

Git is a tool which allows you to push source code or to clone source code form a repository. All applications in PHP Fog have their own git repository, therefore you need to install a git client to be able to clone that repository to your hard drive, and to push changes to deploy your application.

1. Download and install the latest version of Git.
Note Don’t worry that you don’t see an icon when it’s done. It’s not that kind of application.

Create a new SSH Key
2. Create a new SSH Key
Before git is ready, you must first setup security.

Click here to learn how to create an SSH key.

Getting your source code
3. Launch the git bash

4. From the App Console under "Shared Cloud" page in your browser, go to "Source Code" and copy the value for "Clone your git repository:"
This string should look something like "git clone git@:foo.phpfogapp.com"

5. Run git clone
$ git clone git@git01.phpfog.com:foo.phpfogapp.com
Initialized empty Git repository in /Users/(your username)/Documents/git/foo.phpfogapp.com/.git
remote: Counting objects: 3, done.
remote: Total 3 (delta 0), reuse 0 (delta 0)
Receiving objects: 100% (3/3), done.

Add a new file and push changes
6. Change your current working directory
Replace "foo.phpfogapp.com" in the following command with your domain name

cd foo.phpfogapp.com/
7. Create a new file called helloworld.php
Create the helloworld.php file and populate it with some text. You can add other files too like images using git.
<?php
echo "hello world";
?>
8. Add the file to git change list
This command will let git know you want to add the file to the repository. At this point this file is still local to your system.

The "." lets git know that you want to add all the files in this directory recursively.

$ git add .

9. Commit the changes
This commits the added file to the git repository. It is still local, but now it is ready to be uploaded (i.e. "pushed"). The "." lets git know that you want to commit all the files recursively from this directory. This includes the file that you added in the previous step.

$ git commit -m "my first application update"

10. Push the changes
This is the step where the committed files will be uploaded to the server.

$ git push

Done!
Now just go to http://foo.phpfogapp.com/helloworld.php and you'll see the new application running
* git
* gitignore
* Composer
* git submodules
